Today I'm going to show you how I
rehabilitate my quadricep. One week ago,
I tore my quad attempting 270 kg squats.
And I didn't know how bad it was that
night. I didn't sleep very well because
it was a lot of pain. Uh woke up the
next day, I was limping. Uh but then
every day since then, it's gotten
marginally better. 2 days after I got
under an empty leg press with zero
weight on it, and I did three sets of
50. Um I don't want to say there was no
pain. It wasn't bad. I felt it, but it
didn't aggravate it even further. Uh,
and this is exactly what I like to do to
rehabilitate
a grade one muscle tear. So, what is a
grade one muscle tear? It's a slight
tear. That's like the lowest grade. It's
it's almost just a muscle strain, but
technically it is some torn fibers, but
it's still attached to the bone. Um, and
nothing's torn off. So, if it's a grade
two or grade three is where the muscle
tears exactly off the bone, and if
that's the case, you can't walk. So I
know that it's a midbelly tear. Um
pretty sure that I told is the vasis
lateralis which is the outer head of the
quadriceps. Uh it crosses the knee joint
uh through the patella tendon and all
that stuff. So that's one that's the
distal attachment. The proximal
attachment is here the greater
trocanter. So that's this bony
prominence that you might feel on the
side of your hip. So that's the
attachment point. Up to the attachment
point you feel tendons but a little bit
below that like it's it's there's my
greater tracer here. It's a little bit
below that which tells me it's not
tendon. It tells me it's a midbelly tear
and it is very very minor otherwise I
wouldn't be able to walk. Uh now I've
done a few practice runs and this is my
first day. So it's one week since the
tear and it's the first day that I've
put an empty barbell on my back. Um and
I might slowly slowly add a little bit
of weight and that's going to be the
start of my session. Now I'm strong
enough to squat over 300 kg. So, for me,
doing an empty barbell squat is not
stimulating uh for any muscle growth or
any type of uh strength gain or
anything. It's purely rehab and I don't
want my entire session to be based on
that. So, here are a few rules for my
rehabilitation. If it's a grade one
muscle tear, so grade two, it's off the
bone, all that stuff. Grade three, so
grade two is not completely off the
bone, but that's different story. And
and consult with your physiootherapist.
In fact, with all rehabilitation,
consult with your physiootherapist. This
is just what I do. Uh and this is guided
by physiootherapists as well. So uh put
blood through the muscle by working it
doing the exact exercise um that injured
you. Right? So I've done this with bench
press before and the rehab for that was
so I tore a peek. The rehab was lots and
lots of bench press with good technique
of course and a light weight. So I'm
going to be doing the same thing with my
squats. very very lightweight, good
technique, putting as much blood through
the muscle as possible and working to a
point where it don't want to say doesn't
hurt. There's always some slight
discomfort, but you know what I mean.
Don't cause any pain. Now, here's the
next rule for rehabilitation is if
you're going to introduce an exercise to
target that exact muscle, just do one on
your first day back. Just do one. Don't
do a whole bunch of exercises because
what happens is you're warm, you've got
uh adrenaline through the session and it
can mask some of the pain. So you can
have a successful session where you go
first set squats and then you go and do
what other exercise, you know, leg
extension and leg press and all these
great exercises. And you walk out of the
session going, "Wow, I had a really
successful session." And then you cool
down, the adrenaline wears off and
you're in a lot of pain again. And you
come back and you say, "What was it that
I did that increased that pain?" And if
you only did one exercise, you'd know
exactly what it was. But if you did, you
know, multiple exercises, uh, you can't
pinpoint what it was. So today I
introduce it with one exercise and then
I'm going to be doing secondary
exercises that are going to strengthen
the squat pattern without using that
muscle which is going to be stiff-legged
deadlifts. So that's a conventional
deadlift. You use quadriceps. So I don't
want to use that. So stiff-legged
deadlift that's the exact muscle you're
taking out of the equation. So first
exercise high bar squats to put blood in
the area. Second exercise I want to go
as heavy as I can with stifflegged
deadlifts for some reps like maybe sets
of three. And then after that, I'll do
some uh light back extensions and that
will be my session. Uh and let's get
into it. Today I'm going to be doing
high bar squats. Uh I'm using different
footwear than what I use in my low bar
squats. My low bar squats are like a
flat sold shoe so that I can use more of
my hips. But the focus here is
quadriceps. So a high bar squat is a
better position for quadriceps. Elevated
heel weightlifting shoes are also uh
going to put you in a better position to
use your quadriceps, which is more
upright, kind of knees forward. Um, I'm
not going to go heavy. Um, but have a
look at what I'm going to be doing. I
may as well go through the techniques.
So, my shoulders are very tight. Of
course, I bench pressed yesterday.
High bar squat. So, what I like to do is
is same cues as my low bar squat, which
is kind of like squeezing my shoulder
blades back, but then pointing my elbows
down at the same time. So that's upper
back tension. My stance is toes pointed
very slightly outwards and they're, you
know, outside of shoulder width. From
here, what I'm wanting to do is go as
deep as your mobility allows. So deep.
I don't need to hold my breath or brace
or anything like that. I'm still kind of
thinking of the right movement. But
right now, I know I'm not really going
to go heavy,
but the objective is to be as upright as
possible, to bend my knees as much as
possible, and not to train through pain.
Now, that's empty barbell.
I feel it on my quad, but it's not so
bad. Uh, I'm going to go a little bit
heavier. So, next set, we'll go to uh 30
kg and see what that feels like. the
cues for hand placement. It doesn't look
like I'm following them because I've got
very bad shoulder mobility, but it's
hold the bar as close as shoulder
mobility allows. So, very tight
shoulders. That's as close and that's
even quite tight for me. But, you know,
most people with normal shoulder
mobility, you want to hold it relatively
close. That squeezes the shoulder blades
in together tight, which activates the
midback muscles to add tension in your
thoracic spine. So this is your thoracic
spine is is any of your vertebra that's
attached to ribs. That's your thoracic
spine. Pulling your shoulders back
engages these muscles here and that
holds that in place. So if you're
folding forward in your squats like like
at the upper back, squeeze your shoulder
blades together. Now some people say
that's a bad cue cuz it forces you to
tip forward at the hips. That's true. If
you only squeeze your elbows back, and
that's not what I'm telling you to do.
It's elbows back and down. So the down
component is lats. The lats attach from
the front of the humorris here. So
that's the humorous is the upper arm
bone. They come underneath and they
attach to the top of the pelvis. So they
cross a very long distance of your spine
and therefore are responsible for
bracing a large part of your spine.
Right? So so that part here is going to
make your whole core really really
strong and rigid. Com combine that with
a breath hold. Uh that's a very strong
brace. Okay, let's have a look. So high
bar is upper traps, elbows back and
down. Now from here, watch this brace.
Very common thing that people do wrong
is arch their tail here. What you want
to do is brace by ribs down. And I say
piss up a wall. So if your tail's
backwards, think of pissing up a wall
and ribs down.
I'm not going to use high reps because
it's a complex movement and that didn't
feel any different to
20 kg. So, it's 20, 30. Now, we go 40.
See how that feels. I'll keep doing sets
of five until it starts feeling like
maybe I shouldn't be doing that.
Um, I can feel it a little bit more. I
think I've got room for one more
incremental increase, but then that'll
be it. So, I'm going to do 50 kg and
I'll do two sets of five. And that's my
entire squat session. How's that for a
leg day? Yeah. And the idea of it is to
just, you know, plant the seed, just
feel it out and see what it does 24
hours later. So, this is where I'll be
really gauging. Um, was it effective or
not? Uh, and here's the next thing. It's
a really good exercise cuz I was
thinking, do I do my quad work at the
end of the session because I don't
really need much energy to do it, or do
I kill multiple birds with one stone and
do it as a warm-up? So, I do my rehab
work and that's a great warm up for my
deadlifts. So, 50 kg squats not
fatiguing for me. Um, and yeah, great
warm up for deadlifts.
Something else that I'm doing is I'm not
pushing fast on the up phase. So, it's
50 kg on your back, but if you jump as
fast as you can, uh it's a lot more
force being placed through your quads
than 50 kgs, if you know what I'm
saying. So, if I just do it at a
controlled, if I if I really try and be
explosive with that, um there's going to
create a lot more tension on the muscle,
and that can hurt it further. So, um
that's something else that I like to do
with my contractions when I'm
rehabilitating the muscle is a
controlled up phase, which is the
concentric. So, it's a controlled
concentric rather than how I would
normally lift it, which is, you know, a
little bit more explosive. I don't want
to be explosive right now. Um, that felt
totally fine. I'm going to give myself a
minute rest and do one more set. And
that's all of my quad work for the day
and then we'll do some deadlifts. All
right, last set. Last set. Nice and
easy.
Okay, good.
Good. So, now it's just a waiting game.
We wait and see. So, that was a nice
warm up for my uh deadlifts. Um, and now
I'm going to try and lift something
heavy. So, last session for deadlifts uh
was actually 4 days ago and I did 240 kg
for four reps. stiff-legged,
so I don't know how I feel. I typically
don't deadlift within four days of rest,
you know what I mean? Like, I'll give
myself a whole week, but I didn't go
nuts with it. I just did one set just to
feel if I could do it, and I could do
it. So, if I can go heavier than that, I
would like to, but you're going to see
right now. And then that's going to be
the start point of my new program.
Whatever I do today, that's going to
allow me to calculate what the um the
logical progressions are going to be
over the next few weeks. Stifflegged
deadlift time. Uh, I'm using a belt.
I've changed my shoes to flat sold
shoes. Typically, I don't wear shoes,
but it's cold in Sydney right now. Uh,
and that's why I'm wearing these shoes,
but they're very kind of like minimal
kind of sole. And I do use a belt, but
it's loose from start to finish. And
I've explained to you my high belt
position. If you haven't seen that,
that's just where I'm comfortable. If I
use it lower, it digs into my belly fat
and it digs into my ribs and it's
uncomfortable for me. So, I find when I
have it above my ribs, over my sternum,
it doesn't get in the way and it creates
a strong brace for me, not for
everybody. If you don't know, I coach
Thor Bjönson and he has his belt down
here. So, he disagrees with me and
that's fine because it doesn't suit him.
But I promise you, if you find it
uncomfortable, uh, if you find this
position uncomfortable or deadlifting
with a belt uncomfortable, give this a
try. Notice how loose the belt is.
That's one of the keys. Don't go too
tight. Anyhow, so let's have a look at
the stifflegged deadlift. So a regular
deadlift is bent knees and I use my leg
drive. I have a sore quad. I want to
take that out of the equation. So I'm
going to be doing mainly hip hinge. So
deadlift minus quadriceps. Now when I do
that, it's never a complete lockout.
It's always soft knees.
And the difference between a
stiff-legged deadlift and a Romanian
deadlift, I'll show you now. Stiffleged
deadlift is like a conventional
deadlift. You start from the ground,
pick it up, and drop it. Reset. Pick it
up and drop it. So, pick it up, drop it.
Pick it up, drop it. That's a
stifflegged deadlift. My Romanian
deadlift is the same body position, but
I focus on the eccentric.
It's a controlled eccentric.
And this is something that I would do if
I was to focus more on building muscle.
Not that stiff-legged deadlifts don't
build muscle, of course they do, but
this is more of a controlled movement
like you would see bodybuilder style. So
that's how I differentiate between a
Romanian deadlift and a stifflegged
deadlift. So now let's go into what I'm
trying to do. Feet same stance as my
conventional, which is hip width and
arms straight down. Now when I start
this, I really try and emphasize neutral
spine. So when I do my normal deadlift,
I don't care so much for a neutral
spine. I want a rigid torso, but I don't
really care for the arch. But for the
stifflegged deadlift, that's what I'm
aiming for. So that's how I start. So
arch. The next thing that's really
important for the stifflegged deadlift
because you're taking your quads out of
the equation, that means there's a lot
of load being placed on your lower back.
So if that's the case, you need to line
it up correctly in line with your midoot
and keep it there. If the bar drifts
away from your shins, that's increasing
the load on your lower back by a lot.
And you don't want to do that because
that increases the risk of injury. So
here's the important parts. line it up
with your midoot. Reach your arms down
as you would in a normal conventional
deadlift and pull towards your body. So
armpits to pelvis, right? So that's why
I like to have these shin pads on so
that if I graze my shins, it doesn't
hurt. So armpits towards the pelvis to
keep the bar close to your body and to
keep engaging the lats
and minimizing knee bend.
So now I'm locked in.
Nice and easy. Up by a plate at a time.
That felt quite nice. Of course, it's
only 100 kg. Uh, and that's the beauty
of doing so many squats as a warmup. A
lot of times when I deadlift, it's it
doesn't feel as nice as that if I start
my warm-ups with the deadlift. But
starting my warm-ups with a light squat,
I can just go straight into it. So, that
felt like it was weightless. Um, and I'm
just going to keep on going up. So,
that's two plates, which is 100 kg. I'll
go three plates, and I'll keep on going
up by 40 kg jumps, which is one plate on
each side. uh until it feels like that's
too big of a jump. We'll see.
Still feeling nice. 180 next.
Okay. Another 20 kg each side.
Feeling heavier, but feels like how it
should feel. I'm going to reduce the
warm-ups now. So, I'll go 240 next and
see how that feels. Uh, the funny thing
is it's always going to be slow. So, I
don't have quadriceps anymore. It's all
hamstrings. So, typically with the
warm-ups of a normal deadlift, you can
move a lot faster. So, this is by nature
a slower movement in my opinion anyway.
Uh, or for me at least. So, I know that
that was slower, but felt okay. We'll
see how 240 looks. That's what I did on
the weekend. I did four reps of it. Um,
and something inside of me says I'd like
to do six plates. So hopefully that's
where I get to
[Music]
move.
Hey
[Music]
very happy. 260 for a double. Um, one,
that's a PB, so that makes me happy, but
two, I'm injured and I'm able to still
get really, really effective lower body
sessions. So, while my quad might take a
few steps back, it gives me a great
opportunity to build my deadlift
strength. And if I can, you know, over
the next four weeks improve on that, I
think that's going to be a very good
base to build from coming into a squat
prep. So when when my quadricep heals,
coming into a squat prep with a stronger
deadlift or a stronger posterior chain
is a huge advantage. So I am really
happy with that. Um anyway, next up, I'm
going to do some accessories. I'll do
I'll back down. Um you know, there's no
percentages or anything like that.
That's six plates. I'll bring it down to
four plates. So that's 180 kg. And I'll
do a few sets of eight of that.
That was quite comfortable. Great
session. Top set. Three back down sets
of RDL's. Uh now I'm doing uh my one of
my favorite accessory exercises. This is
very lowkey. Uh not demanding at all. I
can talk while I'm doing it, but I'm not
going to. Three sets of 12. I've already
done one set. Um I like to do these
45°ree back extensions. It's kind of
like a bit of an unload for the spine.
So all these big uh spine loading
exercises, deadlift squats, they
compress your spine. Watch me in the
bottom position here. I won't bore you
too much. So just watch me doing one
set. I like to kind of let my spine kind
of just relax and and decompress. Three
sets of 12. I'm very happy with my
session. I hope you liked my session and
I will see you guys next next time.
Sorry I stuttered.
At least apologize.
All right.
Good job. Thank you. All right. See you
next time. Thank you.